Add docs for custom cell type references (#692)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf: custom-celltype-references.md

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

> - [Creating and using custom cell type references](#creating-and-using-custom-cell-type-references)
>   - [Overview](#overview)
>     - [Creating a custom `SingleR` reference dataset](#creating-a-custom-singler-reference-dataset)
>       - [Training the model](#training-the-model)
>     - [Creating a custom `CellAssign` marker-gene list](#creating-a-custom-cellassign-marker-gene-list)
>     - [Creating your cell type metadata file](#creating-your-cell-type-metadata-file)
>     - [Running the workflow with custom references](#running-the-workflow-with-custom-references)
>     - [Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation](#special-considerations-for-repeating-cell-type-annotation)

Reviewer: I would move the doctoc to be below the first header and remove that from the TOC. 
Also maybe based on my suggested addition to the overview do this for the header organization: 
```suggestion
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Creating custom references for cell type annotation] 
    - [Creating a custom `SingleR` reference dataset](#creating-a-custom-singler-reference-dataset)
      - [Training the model](#training-the-model)
    - [Creating a custom `CellAssign` marker-gene list](#creating-a-custom-cellassign-marker-gene-list)
- [Creating your cell type metadata file](#creating-your-cell-type-metadata-file)
- [Running the workflow with custom references](#running-the-workflow-with-custom-references)
- [Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation](#special-considerations-for-repeating-cell-type-annotation)
```

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# Creating and using custom cell type references

## Overview

The `scpca-nf` workflow includes the option to perform cell type annotation, [as described in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#cell-type-annotation), with the reference-based method [`SingleR`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/SingleR.html) and/or the marker-gene based method [`CellAssign`](https://github.com/Irrationone/cellassign).

Several [reference datasets](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) and [marker gene lists](./external-instructions.md#cellassign-references) have been pre-compiled for use.

> This document provides instructions for creating and using your own reference data set for `SingleR` annotation or marker gene list for `CellAssign`, as well as setting up `scpca-nf` to run with these custom references.

Reviewer: I think in the overview I would include a numbered list of steps needed to run the workflow with a custom reference: 
1. Create the custom reference 
2. Create a cell type reference metadata file 
3. Run the workflow 

I would also reorganize the headers so those are the three main sections.

### Creating a custom `SingleR` reference dataset

> `SingleR` reference files should be saved as RDS files and named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, where `<singler_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.

Reviewer: I think before you talk about file types, you should mention what kind of data can be used as a reference for SingleR. Say that you can use bulk RNA-seq datasets or single cell datasets that already have annotations, noting that having annotations is the key piece of information. Also it would be good to mention resources where you can find other datasets (like scRNA-seq). I think we provide all of the celldex references, but you could mention that and then link to the docs that lists all included cell types in each celldex reference.

Author: Re-reading my text, I think I also need to expand more on the distinction between "reference" and "model" - they are not creating the reference, necessarily, but building a model from a reference they identify.

The steps to create this file are as follows:

1. Identify an appropriate reference dataset to use.
This dataset should be either a [`SummarizedExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SummarizedExperiment/man/SummarizedExperiment-class.html) or [`SingleCellExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SingleCellExperiment/man/SingleCellExperiment.html) object, where each column represents a sample or cell, and each row represents a gene.
Rows should be named with Ensembl gene IDs.
2. Use [`SingleR::traingSingleR()`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/SingleR/man/trainSingleR.html) to train your model based on your chosen reference dataset.
3. Add additional fields to the established model object, as needed (see instructions below).
4. Export the trained model to a file `<singler_reference name>_model.rds`.

#### Training the model

To train your model, use the following code, where

- `ref` is your `SummarizedExperiment` or `SingleCellExperiment` reference dataset object with columns as samples or cells and rows as genes.

> - `labels` is a named vector providing labels for the reference dataset, where names correspond to the column names in your reference object.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this has to be named (and the name description is pretty confusing!)
```suggestion
- `labels` is a vector providing cell type labels for the sample or cells in the reference dataset
```

- `restrict` can optionally be used to only consider genes which are present in the _mapping reference_ used by `scpca-nf`.
This should be a vector of Ensembl gene IDs.

```
singler_model <- SingleR::trainSingleR(
  ref = <your reference se or sce>,
  labels = <vector of labels for each sample or cell>,
  restrict = <optionally, vector of gene IDs that are in the mapping reference>
)
```

Once the model object is built, you can optionally add the field `reference_label` with information about the types of labels you specified.
If you do not provide this information, the final `SingleCellExperiment` object produced by `scpca-nf` will have a value `NULL` for the field `metadata(sce)$singler_reference_label`, but no calculations will be affected.

If you choose to add this label, use the following code:

```

> singler_model$reference_label <- "<name describing my labels>"

Reviewer: I think I would mention both `reference_label` and `reference_name` as slots in the metadata. Also I would move the sentence about not setting it and it being NULL to after you show the code to do it.

Reviewer: Wait do we automatically grab the `reference_label` from the filename if it's not in the metadata of the object?

Author: So, this was a "cool" find actually: I'm pretty sure that it turns out we never use `reference_name`, but we sometimes use `reference_label` just to check of it's `label.ont` and handle ontology things accordingly. So I figured...let's just not tell them about these things? I also had the urge to remove `reference_name` from the object but controlled myself since one day maybe it will be useful

Reviewer 2: Since we do use this, I think it is worth mentioning the ontology handling and what label will trigger that code.  I also want a plug somewhere encouraging people to use cell ontologies.

Author: > Wait do we automatically grab the reference_label from the filename if it's not in the metadata of the object?

We only do this in the workflow that builds the reference, so I don't think it's relevant here.

```

Finally, export the trained model to a file named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`:

```
model_file_name <- "<singler_reference_name>_model.rds"
readr::write_rds(singler_model, model_file_name)
```

### Creating a custom `CellAssign` marker-gene list

> `CellAssign` reference files should be saved as TSV files and named `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, where `<cellassign_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.

Reviewer: It might be worth a note both here and in the SingleR section about making sure the references are in the same organism for your sample, otherwise the gene IDs won't match up.

Reviewer: Again, I would also mention that a Cell Assign reference file comes from converting a list of marker genes into a binary matrix with all possible cell types as the columns and all possible genes as the rows. Some context before jumping into file type I think is helpful.

This TSV file should have the following columns and values:

1. `ensembl_id`, which contain Ensembl gene IDs.
2. One column for each cell type label to use for annotation.
All values in this column should be `1` or `0`, indicating whether that row's Ensembl gene id is a marker gene for that cell type (`1`) or not (`0`)

> 3. Optionally, you may wish to a include a column called `"other"` with all values set to `0`.

Reviewer: I don't think this should be optional, otherwise CellAssign will assign it to one of the other cell types, so we want this column to exist.

If `CellAssign` cannot confidently annotate a cell with one of the provided cell type labels, then it will assign the label of `"other"`, indicating that no marker genes were specifically expressed in that cell.

Once this file is created, save it as `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.

### Creating your cell type metadata file

When performing cell type annotation, `scpca-nf` requires a TSV metadata file with information about cell type references, [as described in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#preparing-the-project-cell-type-metadata-file).

> Use the following values for any projects where you'd like to use custom references:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This metadata should include the following columns. Each row should indicate a `scpca_project_id` that you would like to perform cell typing with a custom reference. 
```
Maybe not this exact wording, but something like this.

- `scpca_project_id`: A project ID.
All libraries associated with this project ID will use the same cell type references.
- `singler_ref_name`: The name of your `SingleR` model which should match the `<singler_reference_name>` string you used when creating your `SingleR` reference RDS file.
If you do not wish to perform cell type annotation with `SingleR`, you can use `NA` in this column.
- `singler_ref_file`: The file name of your `SingleR` model, as `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`.
If you do not wish to perform cell type annotation with `SingleR`, you can use `NA` in this column.
- `cellassign_ref_name`: The name of your `CellAssign` model which should match the `<cellassign_ref_name>` string you used when creating your `CellAssign` reference TSV file.
If you do not wish to perform cell type annotation with `CellAssign`, you can use `NA` in this column.
- `cellassign_ref_file`: The file name of your `CellAssign` model, as `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.

> If you do not wish to perform cell type annotation with `CellAssign`, you can use `NA` in this column.

Reviewer: I would turn this into a table, similar to how we talk about the metadata files in the other instructions.

If you do not have a particular name for your labels, you can simply provide `""`, _but you MUST provide a non-default value for this parameter_ unless you are not performing cell type annotation with `SingleR`.
- `params.singler_models_dir`: The path/uri to the directory that contains your `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`.
This value should _not include_ the file name itself.
For example, if the path to your file is `/path/to/reference/<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, only provide the value `/path/to/reference`.
You can skip this parameter if you are not performing cell type annotation with `SingleR`.
- `params.cellassign_reference_dir`: The path/uri to the directory that contains your `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.
This value should _not include_ the file name itself.
For example, if the path to your file is `/path/to/reference/<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, only provide the value `/path/to/reference`.
You can skip this parameter if you are not performing cell type annotation with `CellAssign`.
- `params.project_celltype_metafile`: The path/uri to your cell type metadata file, including the the file name.

> 

Reviewer: We might want to include these in the config template we provide and encourage users to change them in the config file.

1. Create the custom reference(s), for use with `SingleR` and/or `CellAssign`
2. Create a cell type reference metadata file
3. Run the workflow with your custom references

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Create custom cell type references](#create-custom-cell-type-references)
  - [Using a custom `SingleR` reference dataset](#using-a-custom-singler-reference-dataset)
    - [Training the model](#training-the-model)
    - [Special considerations when using ontology labels](#special-considerations-when-using-ontology-labels)
  - [Creating a custom `CellAssign` marker-gene list](#creating-a-custom-cellassign-marker-gene-list)
- [Create a cell type reference metadata file](#create-a-cell-type-reference-metadata-file)
- [Run the workflow with custom references](#run-the-workflow-with-custom-references)
  - [Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation](#special-considerations-for-repeating-cell-type-annotation)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Create custom cell type references

> ### Using a custom `SingleR` reference dataset

Author: I'm glad you pointed this out, since I felt torn on the language. They aren't exactly creating a _reference_ so much as creating a _model_ based on an existing reference. 

As I write this, I wonder - is the answer actually just, `Creating a `SingleR` model from a custom reference dataset`?

> ### Using a custom `SingleR` reference dataset

Reviewer: > As I write this, I wonder - is the answer actually just, Creating a SingleR model from a custom reference dataset?

I like this!

These trained model files should be saved as RDS files and named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, where `<singler_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.
Create this file by taking the following steps:

1. Identify an appropriate reference dataset to use.
This dataset should be either a [`SummarizedExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SummarizedExperiment/man/SummarizedExperiment-class.html) or [`SingleCellExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SingleCellExperiment/man/SingleCellExperiment.html) object, where each column represents a sample or cell, and each row represents a gene.
Rows should be named with Ensembl gene ids.
    a. Some resources you can use to find a suitable reference dataset are the [`celldex` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/vignettes/celldex/inst/doc/userguide.html) or the [`scRNA-seq` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/scRNAseq.html), both from Bioconductor.
Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

> 2. Use [`SingleR::traingSingleR()`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/SingleR/man/trainSingleR.html) to train your model based on your chosen reference dataset.

Author: Amazingly either of us can spell 😂

```
singler_model <- SingleR::trainSingleR(
  ref = <your reference se or sce>,
  labels = <vector of labels for each sample or cell>,
  restrict = <optionally, vector of gene ids that are in the mapping reference>
)
```

Once the model object is built, you can optionally add two fields to the model object:

- `reference_label`, a string with information about the types of labels you specified
- `reference_name`, a string with your reference name

If you choose to add this information, use the following code:

```
singler_model$reference_label <- "<name describing my labels>"
singler_model$reference_name <- "<name of your singler model>"
```

If you do not provide this information, the final `SingleCellExperiment` object produced by `scpca-nf` will have `NULL` values for the fields `metadata(sce)$singler_reference_label` and `metadata(sce)$singler_reference_name`, respectively, but no calculations will be affected.

Finally, export the trained model to a file named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`:
```
model_file_name <- "<singler_reference_name>_model.rds"
readr::write_rds(singler_model, model_file_name)
```

#### Special considerations when using ontology labels

> If you chose to use ontology labels, you may wish to set the `reference_label` field to the string `"label.ont"` as shown below.

Reviewer: Should we tell them where to get cell ontology labels from?

Reviewer: Also it may be nice to include a brief sentence about why we encourage ontology labels.

Author: FYI I added this higher up in the docs where I discuss where you can find ontology ids

```
singler_model$reference_label <- "label.ont"
```

Using this specific string will trigger the `scpca-nf` workflow to additionally expect a dataframe with two columns, `ontology_id` and `ontology_cell_names`, to be present in the `SingleR` model object in the field `celltype_ontology_df`.
Therefore, if you supply the string `"label.ont"`, you must also add this field.
The `ontology_id` column should contain ontology id values corresponding to labels in your `labels` vector, and the `ontology_cell_names` column should contain the human-readable cell type names associated with each ontology ID (e.g., `"B cell"`).

> The [`oncoProc` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ontoProc.html) from `Bioconductor` may be useful for compiling this information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`ontoProc` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ontoProc.html) from `Bioconductor` may be useful for compiling this information.
```

```
singler_model$celltype_ontology_df <- data.frame(
  ontology_id = <vector of ontology ids corresponding to annotation labels>,
  ontology_cell_names = <vector of matching cell type names>
)
```

### Creating a custom `CellAssign` marker-gene list

The `CellAssign` reference file should be created by converting a list of marker genes for a set of cell type labels into a binary matrix with values of `0` and `1`.
This matrix should have all possible cell types as the columns and all possible genes, represented as Ensembl gene ids, as the rows.

> Values of `1` indicate that the given gene is a marker gene for the give cell type, and values of `0` indicate that the gene is not a marker gene for the cell type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Values of `1` indicate that the given gene is a marker gene for the given cell type, and values of `0` indicate that the gene is not a marker gene for the cell type.
```

> When compiling this information, it is important to use marker genes from the same organism as the sample you are analyzing to ensure matching gene ids.

Reviewer: Also they should be ensembl gene ids.

`CellAssign` reference files should be saved as TSV files and named `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, where `<cellassign_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.

This TSV file should have the following columns and values:

1. `ensembl_id`, which contains Ensembl gene ids.
2. One column for each cell type label to use for annotation.
All values in this column should be `1` or `0`, indicating whether that row's Ensembl gene id is a marker gene for that cell type (`1`) or not (`0`)
3. `other`, which contains all values set to `0`.
If `CellAssign` cannot confidently annotate a cell with one of the provided cell type labels, then it will assign the label of `"other"`, indicating that no marker genes were specifically expressed in that cell.

Once this file is created, save it as `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.

## Create a cell type reference metadata file

When performing cell type annotation, `scpca-nf` requires a TSV metadata file with information about cell type references, [as described in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#preparing-the-project-cell-type-metadata-file).

> All libraries a given `scpca_project_id` will use the same reference dataset for each of `SingleR` and `CellAssign`, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All libraries with the same `scpca_project_id` will use the same reference dataset for each of `SingleR` and `CellAssign`, respectively.
```

- `params.singler_models_dir`: The path/uri to the directory that contains your `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`.
This value should _not include_ the file name itself.
For example, if the path to your file is `/path/to/reference/<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, only provide the value `/path/to/reference`.
You can skip this parameter if you are not performing cell type annotation with `SingleR`.
- `params.cellassign_reference_dir`: The path/uri to the directory that contains your `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.
This value should _not include_ the file name itself.
For example, if the path to your file is `/path/to/reference/<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, only provide the value `/path/to/reference`.
You can skip this parameter if you are not performing cell type annotation with `CellAssign`.
- `params.project_celltype_metafile`: The path/uri to your cell type metadata file, including the file name.

When running the workflow, be sure to use the `--perform_celltyping` flag to perform cell type annotation.

> You can run the workflow as (showing all parameters specified at the command line, for example):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the workflow using the below code. 
The example below shows all parameters specified at the command line, but if specifying them in the configuration file you would be able to remove those lines. 
```
Just being a little bit more explicit here.

```bash
nextflow run AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf \
  --singler_models_dir <directory/containing/singler/model/file> \
  --cellassign_reference/dir <directory/containing/cellassign/reference/file> \
  --project_celltype_metafile <path/to/celltype metafile> \
  --perform_celltyping
```

### Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation

As described [in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#repeating-cell-type-annotation), cell type annotation is, by default, not repeated if results already exist.

> `scpca-nf` determines if results already exist based on the _file name_ of the provided reference file.

Reviewer: I think you also want to mention that its either the file name not changing or the existence of intermediate checkpoint files. At first I looked at this and was like that's not correct, but then I remembered we check both.

- [Create a cell type reference metadata file](#create-a-cell-type-reference-metadata-file)
- [Run the workflow with custom references](#run-the-workflow-with-custom-references)
  - [Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation](#special-considerations-for-repeating-cell-type-annotation)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Create custom cell type references

### Creating a `SingleR` model from a custom reference dataset

Your `SingleR` reference dataset should be a well-curated gene expression dataset that contains samples, or cells in the case of single-cell expression data, with known cell type annotations.
[As described in the `SingleR` book](https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/), `SingleR` uses these reference expression values and associated labels to identify cells in your dataset with similar expression patterns.
Either bulk gene expression (microarray or RNA-seq) or single-cell datasets with annotations can be used as references.
To the best of your ability, you should identify and use a reference dataset that contains cell types that you expect will also be present in your data.

> The reference dataset should also be the same organism as the sample you are analyzing to ensure matching gene ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reference dataset should also be the same organism as the sample you are analyzing to ensure matching gene IDs.
```

The `scpca-nf` workflow requires a _pre-trained `SingleR` model_ as built from your selected reference dataset.
Therefore, you will need to install the `SingleR` package to prepare a reference model:

```
# install BiocManager, as needed, to install Bioconductor packages
# install.packages("BiocManager")

# install SingleR
BiocManager::install("SinglerR")
```

Trained model files should be saved as RDS files and named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, where `<singler_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.
Create this file by taking the following steps:

1. Identify an appropriate reference dataset to use.
This dataset should be either a [`SummarizedExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SummarizedExperiment/man/SummarizedExperiment-class.html) or [`SingleCellExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SingleCellExperiment/man/SingleCellExperiment.html) object, where each column represents a sample or cell, and each row represents a gene.

> Rows should be named with Ensembl gene ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rows should be named with Ensembl gene IDs.
```

Some resources you can use to find a suitable reference dataset are the Bioconductor packages [`celldex`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/vignettes/celldex/inst/doc/userguide.html) and [`scRNA-seq`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/scRNAseq.html), and the [`Azimuth`](https://azimuth.hubmapconsortium.org/references/) database.

> Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

Author: I'm not sure that showing how to work with `SummarizedExperiment` (or `SCE`s for that matter) is exactly the right scope here, but I think it would make sense to maybe also include links in this broken-out section, like

https://bioconductor.org/books/3.18/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html

and maybe this for `SE`? to be honest I don't think this one is communicating what we want to communicate though, but not sure about a different/better reference.... Any ideas? https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/SummarizedExperiment/inst/doc/SummarizedExperiment.html

> Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

Author: I went ahead and added here to start fyi - https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/692/commits/9a5102d33bbeb90546b8bcd3354e680d787d1fb7

> Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think links make the most sense here. But I would focus on conversion rather than the structure of the object. 

So for SummarizedExperiment I might link to https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/SummarizedExperiment/inst/doc/SummarizedExperiment.html#constructing-a-summarizedexperiment

It isn't perfect, because it talks a lot about intervals, which we don't need, but it gets the idea that if you have a matrix, it is pretty easy to make the object, especially the second example (which should be first).

For SCE, maybe links to https://satijalab.org/seurat/reference/as.singlecellexperiment and https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.19/bioc/html/zellkonverter.html

> Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

Author: eh? https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/817c259d4c25dfd97bdfbf820397658090df6a4d/custom-celltype-references.md#identify-an-appropriate-reference-dataset

Therefore, if you supply the string `"label.ont"`, you must also add this field.
The `ontology_id` column should contain ontology id values corresponding to labels in your `labels` vector, and the `ontology_cell_names` column should contain the human-readable cell type names associated with each ontology ID (e.g., `"B cell"`).
The [`ontoProc` package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ontoProc.html) from `Bioconductor` may be useful for compiling this information.

```
singler_model$celltype_ontology_df <- data.frame(
  ontology_id = <vector of ontology ids corresponding to annotation labels>,
  ontology_cell_names = <vector of matching cell type names>
)
```

#### Export the model

Finally, export the trained model to a file named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`:
```
model_file_name <- "<singler_reference_name>_model.rds"
readr::write_rds(singler_model, model_file_name)
```

### Creating a custom `CellAssign` reference from a marker-gene list

> The `CellAssign` reference file should be created by converting a list of marker genes for a set of cell type labels into a binary matrix with values of `0` and `1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CellAssign` reference file is created by converting a list of marker genes for a set of cell type labels into a binary matrix with values of `0` and `1`.
```

> This matrix should have all possible cell types as the columns and all possible genes, represented as Ensembl gene ids, as the rows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This matrix should have all possible cell types as the columns and all possible genes, represented as Ensembl gene IDs, as the rows.
```

Values of `1` indicate that the given gene is a marker gene for the given cell type, and values of `0` indicate that the gene is not a marker gene for the cell type.

> When compiling this information, you should use marker genes (represented as Ensembl gene ids) from the same organism as the sample you are analyzing to ensure matching Ensembl gene ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When compiling this information, be sure to use Ensembl gene IDs from the same organism as the sample you are analyzing!
```

Some resources that you might find helpful for compiling marker gene lists include [PanglaoDB](https://panglaodb.se/) (note that the [pre-compiled `CellAssign` references in `scpca-nf`] were obtained from `PanglaoDB` marker gene lists), [`MSigDB`](https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/genesets.jsp?collection=C8), [`CellMarker`](http://bio-bigdata.hrbmu.edu.cn/CellMarker/), and [`singleCellBase`](http://cloud.capitalbiotech.com/SingleCellBase/).
Note that the [`CellAssign` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md/#cellassign-references) were derived from marker gene sets in `PanglaoDB`.

`CellAssign` reference files should be saved as TSV files and named `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, where `<cellassign_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.

This TSV file should have the following columns and values:

> 1. `ensembl_id`, which contains Ensembl gene ids.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `ensembl_id`, which contains Ensembl gene IDs.
```

2. One column for each cell type label to use for annotation.
All values in this column should be `1` or `0`, indicating whether that row's Ensembl gene id is a marker gene for that cell type (`1`) or not (`0`)
3. `other`, which contains all values set to `0`.
If `CellAssign` cannot confidently annotate a cell with one of the provided cell type labels, then it will assign the label of `"other"`, indicating that no marker genes were specifically expressed in that cell.

Once this file is created, save it as `<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`.

## Create a cell type reference metadata file

When performing cell type annotation, `scpca-nf` requires a TSV metadata file with information about cell type references, [as described in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#preparing-the-project-cell-type-metadata-file).

All libraries with the same `scpca_project_id` will use the same reference dataset for each of `SingleR` and `CellAssign`, respectively.
The project cell type metadata file should contain these five columns with the following information:

| column_id             | contents |
| --------------------- | -------- |

> | `scpca_project_id`    | Project id matching values in the run metadata file |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `scpca_project_id`    | Project ID matching values in the run metadata file |
```

For example, if the path to your file is `/path/to/reference/<cellassign_reference_name>.tsv`, only provide the value `/path/to/reference`.
You can skip this parameter if you are not performing cell type annotation with `CellAssign`.
- `params.project_celltype_metafile`: The path/uri to your cell type metadata file, including the file name.

When running the workflow, be sure to use the `--perform_celltyping` flag to perform cell type annotation.

You can run the workflow using the below code.
The example below shows all parameters specified at the command line, but if specifying them in the configuration file you would be able to remove those lines.

```bash
nextflow run AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf \
  --singler_models_dir <directory/containing/singler/model/file> \
  --cellassign_reference/dir <directory/containing/cellassign/reference/file> \
  --project_celltype_metafile <path/to/celltype metafile> \
  --perform_celltyping
```

### Special considerations for repeating cell type annotation

As described [in these instructions](./external-instructions.md#repeating-cell-type-annotation), cell type annotation is, by default, not repeated if results already exist.

> `scpca-nf` determines if results already exist based on two criteria: i) the _file name_ of the provided reference file, and ii) the existence of [intermediate checkpoint files](./external-instructions.md#repeating-cell-type-annotation) from previous runs of cell typing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`scpca-nf` determines if results already exist based on two criteria: i) the _file name_ of the provided reference file has not changed, and ii) [intermediate checkpoint files](./external-instructions.md#repeating-cell-type-annotation) from previous runs of cell typing already exist.
```

The `scpca-nf` workflow requires a _pre-trained `SingleR` model_ as built from your selected reference dataset.
Therefore, you will need to install the `SingleR` package to prepare a reference model:

```
# install BiocManager, as needed, to install Bioconductor packages
# install.packages("BiocManager")

# install SingleR
BiocManager::install("SinglerR")
```

Trained model files should be saved as RDS files and named `<singler_reference_name>_model.rds`, where `<singler_reference_name>` is a string of your choosing.
Create this file by taking the following steps:

1. [Identify an appropriate reference dataset](#identify-an-appropriate-reference-dataset)
2. [Train your model](#train-the-singler-model) based on your reference dataset with [`SingleR::trainSingleR()`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/SingleR/man/trainSingleR.html)
3. [Add additional fields](#add-additional-fields-to-the-model-object) to the established model object
4. [Export the trained model](#export-the-model) to a file named `<singler_reference name>_model.rds`

> #### Identify an appropriate reference dataset

Reviewer 2: Maybe?
```suggestion
#### Selecting and formatting a reference dataset
```

Either bulk gene expression (microarray or RNA-seq) or single-cell datasets with annotations can be used as references.
To the best of your ability, you should identify and use a reference dataset that contains cell types that you expect will also be present in your data.
The reference dataset should be from the same organism as the sample you are analyzing.

> Your reference dataset should be formatted as either a [`SummarizedExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SummarizedExperiment/man/SummarizedExperiment-class.html) or [`SingleCellExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SingleCellExperiment/man/SingleCellExperiment.html) object, where each column represents a sample or cell, and each row represents a gene.
> Rows should be named with Ensembl gene IDs.
> For more information on creating these types of objects, please see the following resources:
> 
> - [Constructing a `SummarizedExperiment` object](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/SummarizedExperiment/inst/doc/SummarizedExperiment.html#constructing-a-summarizedexperiment)
> - An introduction to [the `SingleCellExperiment` class](https://bioconductor.org/books/3.18/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html#storing-primary-experimental-data)
> - [Converting `Seurat` objects](https://satijalab.org/seurat/reference/as.singlecellexperiment) or [`AnnData` objects](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.19/bioc/html/zellkonverter.html) to `SingleCellExperiment` objects
> 
> Some resources you may find helpful for obtaining a suitable reference dataset are the Bioconductor packages [`celldex`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/vignettes/celldex/inst/doc/userguide.html) and [`scRNA-seq`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/scRNAseq.html), and the [`Azimuth`](https://azimuth.hubmapconsortium.org/references/) database.
> Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

Reviewer 2: I reversed the order here to keep the section about what a reference dataset is with where to find them, followed by the conversion section, along with just a bit of wording changes. (should -> must)

```suggestion
Some resources you may find helpful for obtaining a suitable reference dataset are the Bioconductor packages [`celldex`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/vignettes/celldex/inst/doc/userguide.html) and [`scRNA-seq`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/data/experiment/html/scRNAseq.html), and the [`Azimuth`](https://azimuth.hubmapconsortium.org/references/) database.
Note that the [`SingleR` reference datasets which `scpca-nf` has pre-compiled for use](./external-instructions.md#singler-references) are a selected subset of references from the `celldex` package.

For use with `SingleR`, the reference dataset must be formatted as either a [`SummarizedExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SummarizedExperiment/man/SummarizedExperiment-class.html) or [`SingleCellExperiment`](https://rdrr.io/bioc/SingleCellExperiment/man/SingleCellExperiment.html) object, where each column represents a sample or cell, and each row represents a gene.
Rows should be named with Ensembl gene IDs.

For more information on creating these types of objects, please see the following resources:

- [Constructing a `SummarizedExperiment` object](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/SummarizedExperiment/inst/doc/SummarizedExperiment.html#constructing-a-summarizedexperiment)
- An introduction to [the `SingleCellExperiment` class](https://bioconductor.org/books/3.18/OSCA.intro/the-singlecellexperiment-class.html#storing-primary-experimental-data)
- [Converting `Seurat` objects](https://satijalab.org/seurat/reference/as.singlecellexperiment) or [`AnnData` objects](https://bioconductor.org/packages/3.18/bioc/html/zellkonverter.html) to `SingleCellExperiment` objects
```
